**"Come Correct": Conducting Community Engaged Studios to Adapt
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for the Chronic Pain and Depression
Co-Morbidity Among Older Black Adults**

Tony V Pham,^1^ Kozbi Bayne,^1^ Defne Yucebas/ ^1^ Nia Stewart/,^1^
Nomin Enkhtsetseg/^2^ Taveras, Denise Altagracia, ^1^ Michael
Kincade,^3^ and Ana-Maria Vranceanu^1^

^1^ Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, US

^2^ Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA,
US

^3^ Center for Alzheimer\'s Research and Treatment, Massachusetts
Alzheimer\'s Disease Research Center, Boston, MA, US

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Tony V
Pham, Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, 1
Bowdoin St, Boston, MA 02114, US. Email: tonyvpham@mgh.harvard.edu.
Phone: 504-662-7516. Fax: 617-384-8488. ORCID: 0000-0002-3261-8185.

**Word Count:** 4,777

**Number of Tables:** 2

**Number of Figures:** 1

**Declarations:**

*Funding:* This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Dr.
Pham's work was supported by K23AT012363. Dr. Vranceanu's work was
supported by K24AT011760.

*Competing Interests:* The authors have no relevant financial or
non-financial interests to disclose.

*Ethics Approval:* This study was performed in line with the principles
of the Declaration of Helsinki. The study deemed IRB exempt on 2/22/23
by the Massachusetts General Brigham IRB.

*Data availability*: The qualitative interview transcripts and related
materials generated and analyzed during the current study are not
publicly available due to privacy and confidentiality considerations.
However, de-identified excerpts or relevant portions of the data may be
made available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

*Author Contributions*

All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Material
preparation, data collection, and analysis were performed by Tony V
Pham, Nomin Enkhtsetseg, and Denise Altagracia Taveras. The original
draft of the manuscript was written by Tony V Pham and Kozbi Bayne, and
all authors reviewed and edited on previous versions of the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

**Abstract**

*Introduction*

Older Black adults experience disproportionately high rates of chronic
pain (CP) and depression, yet inequities in access, recognition, and
culturally resonant treatment persist. Mindfulness-Based Cognitive
Therapy (MBCT) is an evidence-based group intervention for depression
with emerging promise for CP. However, adaptations for Black older
adults with comorbidity remain underexplored.

*Methods*

Using a community-based participatory research (CBPR) framework, we
conducted four Community Engaged Studio sessions with 21 older Black
adults (ages 51--84) in Boston, all reporting CP (â‰¥ 3 months) and mild
to moderate depressive symptoms. Participants reviewed MBCT content and
reflected on cultural relevance, barriers, and facilitators. Thematic
analysis identified emergent patterns in perceptions of MBCT.

*Results*

Four themes emerged: (1) preference for flexible, sustainable delivery
(community-based, in-person, and hybrid options with shorter sessions),
(2) importance of instructor concordance grounded in respect and shared
cultural context, (3) conditional acceptability of mindfulness and
movement practices when adapted to faith, physical limitations, and
language, and (4) need for CBT components to use accessible language,
emphasize empowerment, and integrate group support and community
resources.

*Discussion*

Findings highlight MBCT's feasibility for Black older adults with the
CP--depression comorbidity when adapted for cultural resonance,
accessibility, and sustainability. Results inform future intervention
tailoring to advance equity in chronic pain and mental health care.

**Key Words:**

chronic pain, depression, African Americans, mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy, community-based particpatory research

**Introduction**\
By 2060, America's Black older adult population is expected to double
(Administration for Community Living, 2020). Current inequities in
chronic disease, pain management, and healthcare access are likely to
intensify, posing a significant public health equity concern (Pham et
al., 2023). (Administration for Community Living, 2020). Chronic pain
(CP), typically defined as pain lasting three months or longer (e.g.,
arthritis, back pain), is highly prevalent and represents a leading
cause of disability globally (Sholz et al., 2019). While already
staggering that one-fifth of Americans experience CP, up to 78% of Black
older adults suffer from CP (Barzargan et al., 2016; Karter et al.,
2015; Robinson-Lane & Booker, 2018). Despite experiencing
disproportionately higher rates of chronic pain, Black older adults
often receive less recognition of their pain and consequently fewer
treatment opportunities (Pickett et al., 2014). Comorbid depression and
CP in older Black adults demand a response.

According to the 2019 National Health Interview Survey, nearly one in
twenty US adults lives with co-occurring CP and depression. The
likelihood of experiencing functional limitations in daily activities
drastically increases for individuals co-experiencing depression and CP,
compared to individuals experiencing just one of the two (de Heer et
al., 2014). Individuals with co-occurring depression and CP
overwhelmingly report difficulties at work (69.4%), running errands
(43.7%), and socializing (55.7%) (De La Rosa, 2023). From a
psychological perspective, the concurrent development of chronic
musculoskeletal pain and depression due to ineffective coping and fear
avoidance leads individuals to a disability spiral of worsened pain,
depression, and disability (Pham et al., 2023; Vlaeyen et al., 1995;
Crombez et al., 1999). Previous findings indicate that improving quality
of life for individuals co-experiencing chronic pain and depression
requires a concentrated effort and suggest psychosocial interventions
can break the disability spiral (De La Rosa et al., 2024). In contrast
to other non-pharmacological treatments for co-occurring CP and
depression including exercise, behavioral health approaches, and
restorative practices, community-based group sessions can more directly
aid older Black adults in learning effective coping skills and reducing
fear avoidance ( Pham et al., 2023; McCracken et al., 2001).

Self-reported CP is most prevalent among older adultsand adults living
in poverty (Dallaher et al., 2018), [two categories that often
disproportionately include older Black adults]{.mark} (Pham et al.,
2023). Socioeconomic status has been related to worsened CP outcomes in
older black adults (Baker et al, 2002; Bazargan et al, 2016).
Furthermore, communication barriers make CP-depression interventions a
high priority. Clinicians report difficulty understanding and believing
older Black adult's experiences with pain and depression due to
different communication styles (Shavers et al., 2010), negatively
compounding with this population's reported extreme pain severity and
duration (Anderson et al., 2009; Mossey, 2011). CP symptoms may mask
depression, leading to lower clinician recognition and treatment of
comorbid CP and depression in older Black adults (Bair et al., 2008).
Furthermore, Black older adults are more at risk of dismissing their
depressive symptoms and forgoing treatment than other groups (Green,
2003; Pham et al., 2023). Issues in communication and lessened
willingness to seek care, in tandem with a dearth of culturally
competent clinicians, compound to adversely impact health outcomes for
older Black adults with comorbid CP and depression.

Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) is an evidence-based
intervention combining cognitive behavioral therapy techniques with
mindfulness practices, best defined as non-evaluative present moment
awareness (Kabat-Zinn, 1994), to promote long-term mental health
maintenance. Mindfulness within MBCT is a powerful tool helping
individuals reduce rumination and decenter depression-related thoughts
(Kabat-Zinn, 1998). Early studies from the 2000s showed promising
results in reducing depression symptoms, drastically increasing quality
of life (Kuyken et al., 2008). These results have since been replicated
and validated (Mackenzie & Kocovski, 2016).

MBCT is also a promising, though less explored, intervention for CP.
MBCT teaches coping skills targeted to decrease pain anxiety and pain
interference, often leading to better recovery outcomes (Pinto et al.,
2024). The program promotes self-compassion and understanding,
encouraging participants to have a nonjudgmental attitude toward their
current pain experience (Ellerbroek et al., 2023; Kabat-Zinn & Hahn,
2009). Repeatedly, MBCT has been shown to effectively improve coping
with negative emotions, which is critical for patients experiencing CP
(Garland et al., 2014, 2016).

However, there is a gap in understanding how individuals co-experiencing
CP and depression could specifically benefit from MBCT, particularly for
older Black adults. There are promising findings regarding treatment of
co-occurring CP and depression with MBCT, including short-term
reductions in depressed mood and increased mindfulness in patients (Pei
et al., 2020). However, longer follow-ups and larger samples are needed
to isolate MBCT's ability to intervene in comorbid CP and depression.

For MBCT to meet the cultural and contextual needs of older Black
adults, who are especially at risk for CP-depression comorbidity, MBCT
must be heavily adapted based on community input. Community-engaged
research projects include community members alongside scientific teams
to better meet group needs (Wallerstein & Duran, 2006). Community
research has many benefits, particularly in boosting equity and access
to the scientific process (Kantamneni et al., 2019). There are mutual
benefits in implementing a community engagement framework, with past
studies demonstrating boosted community trust and willingness to
participate, which is key in engaging older Black adults who are wary of
institutional studies due to historical and/or personal trauma
(Cunningham-Erves et al., 2020).

The primary aim of this research study was to explore perceptions of
MBCT for chronic pain-depression comorbidity among a group of older
Black adults with a shared history of chronic pain and depression,
including: What barriers and facilitators do older Black adults
encounter in accessing and participating in MBCT? How do older Black
adults perceive MBCT's mindfulness and CBT components regarding
experiencing chronic pain and depression? What instructor
characteristics do Black Elders find essential for effective MBCT
delivery?

This study employed community-engaged participatory research (CEPR) to
emphasize the importance of collaboration and mutual respect between
researchers and older Black adult community members. CEPR allows for
participant feedback and enhances the cultural relevance and impact of
health interventions (Cunningham-Erves, 2020). The authors employed
thematic analysis to identify emergent themes from a community-engaged
studio. All elements of the research process were informed by involving
community stakeholders, from initial study design to the dissemination
of findings.

This research expands the understanding of mindfulness interventions
within culturally diverse populations, especially pertaining to Black
older adults' unique experiences. There is a potential for findings to
inform our planned adaptation of MBCT for CP and depression comorbidity.
The findings have important implications for practice and policy, with
the potential to inform public health initiatives and community health
strategies designed to enhance chronic pain and mental health services
for underserved populations. Equitable healthcare access and culturally
competent care are of utmost importance, and are key in addressing
chronic pain and depression among older Black adults. Given the large
population of older Black adults living with comorbid CP and depression
that severely limits their daily activities and lessens their quality of
life, adapting MBCT to meet this population's needs while using a
community-enhanced framework is significant and will yield relevant
results across many domains of culturally competent care.

**Method**

*Background*\
This study utilized a community-engaged participatory research approach
to address chronic pain and depression among older Black adults residing
in the Greater Boston Area. Community-engaged research aims to foster
collaborative partnerships between researchers and community members,
enhancing the relevance, validity, and real-world impact of
health-related research outcomes. Through equitable involvement, shared
decision-making, and an emphasis on mutual respect, community-engaged
methods help to remedy historical inequities and elevate community
voices in generating trusted evidence for policy and practice (Israel et
al., 2010; Wallerstein et al., 2018).

Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR) served as the foundational
framework, emphasizing active community participation in all phases of
the study---defining research questions, refining interventions,
collecting and analyzing data, and disseminating findings (Oetzel et
al., 2018). The principles of ongoing collaboration and co-learning
guided the team in adapting Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT)
for chronic pain--depression co-morbidity.

*Study Site and Context*\
Members of the research team recruited in collaboration with Union
Capital Boston (UCB), an established network for Black individuals in
Boston to access resources, social opportunities, and collective
support. All study activities were hybrid and embedded within local
sites (e.g., public library space) to maximize cultural resonance and
community trust.

*Study Topic*\
The core focus was to explore perceptions and experiences of MBCT within
the context of chronic pain and depression among older Black adults (age
50+). MBCT is an evidence-based psychotherapy combining cognitive
behavioral techniques with mindfulness meditation, delivered in an
8-week group format using practices such as body scans, guided
meditation, and mindful awareness of thoughts and emotions (Kabat-Zinn,
1990; Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2013). Unlike traditional CBT, MBCT
encourages participants to observe and accept thoughts as transient
mental events, thereby equipping individuals with skills to break cycles
of rumination and improve resilience (Hofmann et al., 2010).

*Participants*\
Participants were recruited in close partnership with UCB and the CE
Studio community navigator, Kincade, utilizing purposive sampling to
ensure the inclusion of older Black adults (â‰¥ 50 years old) experiencing
chronic musculoskeletal pain (â‰¥ 3 months, pain severity â‰¥ 4 on the
Numeric Rating Scale) and mild to moderate depressive symptoms (PHQ-9
score 5--14). Recruitment occurred from June to August 2023. Exclusion
criteria included moderately severe/severe depression (PHQ-9 â‰¥ 15),
substance abuse/dependence, significant cognitive impairment (Short
Portable Mental Status Questionnaire), participation in concurrent
behavioral trials, or previous extensive exposure to CBT/mindfulness.
All participants received compensation for their participation and
travel.

*Measures*\
The study adopted the Community Engaged Studio methodology, which
prioritizes bidirectional learning and active co-creation with community
stakeholders throughout each session (Meadows et al., 2015; Wallerstein
et al., 2018). Studio sessions incorporated participatory activities
such as brainstorming, mapping, and prototyping to invite creativity and
build solutions that reflected community-identified needs. Facilitators
established clear, inclusive objectives, ensuring all voices were heard
and respected.

Data collection relied on a demonstration of MBCT contents and
exploratory questions designed to elicit rich, narrative accounts of
participant experiences and perceptions of MBCT. Questions focused on
community readiness ("Are there efforts, initiatives or projects that
you are aware of that involve sharing health information with others
involved in your healthcare?"), design features ("How might we make the
app easier to use for those who are not tech savvy?"), adoption ("What
app components seem like you could use right away?"), and sustainability
("Thinking about value and cost, who should pay for the app?"). All
questions were delivered by a diverse research team: a Vietnamese
American early-career psychiatrist, a Mongolian American undergraduate
assistant, and an African American undergraduate assistant. Researcher
rapport and familiarity with participants were fostered prior to
sessions to support trust and cultural sensitivity. Each interview
averaged 134 minutes (range: 119--152 minutes), spread over four
sessions, and was audio-recorded and transcribed.

*Procedure*\
Community partnership was central throughout, beginning with
relationship-building and the identification of shared goals with UCB.
Studio agendas encouraged open dialogue, rapid feedback, and
collaborative reflection. All studio discussions were documented using
visual aids to facilitate understanding and outcome visualization.
Synthesized input was shared back with participants for iterative
feedback and refinement. Regular follow-ups post-studio maintained
engagement and supported implementation of actionable solutions.

All community experts provided informed consent, and confidentiality was
strictly maintained during data collection, analysis, and dissemination,
in accordance with ethical research standards.

*Data Analysis*\
Thematic analysis of interview transcripts, in the style ofBraun and
Clarke (2006), involved systematic steps: familiarization with data,
generating initial codes, searching for and reviewing themes, defining
and naming themes, and producing a coherent narrative report. NVivo
software supported coding and organization. TVP, NE, and DAT
collaboratively contributed to each phase, cross-validating codes and
reconciling inductive and theoretical insights to strengthen analytical
rigor. The study adhered to widely recognized standards for qualitative
research reporting (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Levitt et al., 2018).

**Results**\
We conducted 4 CE Studios with community experts on the chronic
pain-depression co-morbidity among older Black adults. Each CE Studio
included 5-6 community experts and explored the acceptability and
feasibility of MBCT for older Black adults with co-morbid chronic pain
and depression.

*Demographic Variables*\
Twenty-one older Black adults participated as community experts, ranging
in age from 51 to 84 years (average 68 years old), with a majority being
female (85%). Most were Protestant Baptist (60%), while the remainder
represented other Christian faiths. Education was primarily at the high
school level (60%), with others holding college or vocational degrees.

Majority of participants grew up in Dorchester, Roxbury (40%), or Boston
(25%), Massachusetts, with the remainder coming from surrounding
regions. At the time of our CE Studios, all community experts resided in
Dorchester or Roxbury- two neighboring areas in the Greater Boston Area,
with substantial populations of people of color.

Over half of the participants were retired (55%), with diverse
occupational backgrounds. The majority were single (40%) or widowed
(35%). Mean Numeric Rating Scale scores reflected moderately high pain
(mean 7.03), and mean PHQ-9 scores reflected moderate depressive
symptoms (mean 6.75). Chronic medical conditions such as pain,
hypertension, and diabetes were common, alongside psychiatric diversity.

*Qualitative Results*\
Thematic analysis of the focus group transcripts revealed four main
themes: (1) flexible and sustainable program delivery, (2) instructor
concordance rooted in enagement and respect, (3) nuanced acceptability
of mindfulness and movement practices, and (4) CBT tailored for more
inclusivity and empowerment (**Figure 1**).

\[ Insert *Figure 1. Map of Themes and Sub-themes from the Qualitative
Analysis* \]

\[ Insert *Table 1*. *Representative Quotes from the Community
Engagement Studios* \]

*Theme: Flexible and sustainable program delivery*\
*Sub-theme: Persistent and Self-Sustainable Delivery*\
Community experts stressed ongoing engagement rather than short-term
involvement. They emphasized the importance of embedding MBCT programs
or \'workshops\' within community settings, rather than limiting them to
research initiatives, and highlighted the need for sustained and
respectful relationships. Economic fairness was central, especially for
disabled participants or those with financial limitations, with calls
for consistent grant funding to ensure long-term viability. Community
experts cited existing community programs that provided services such as
caregiving, meals, and childcare as models for holistic support.
Overall, community experts stated that the goal of MBCT for the chronic
pain-depression co-morbidity among older Black adults should be
sustainable impact and empowerment rather than short-term gains.

*Sub-theme: In-Person Options at Thoughtful Locations*\
Our community experts preferred local, in-person meetings for
accessibility and comfort, suggesting venues like community centers,
schools, libraries, and parks, particularly in underserved
neighborhoods. Being physically present, according to our community
experts, would foster trust and interpersonal relationships. Community
experts recommended rotating locations to improve inclusivity. While
some acknowledged the important role of virtual sessions, especially for
those uncomfortable with technology or with mobility issues, the
majority preference was for face-to-face, community-based programming.

*Sub-theme: Virtual Options for Accessibility and Convenience*\
Our community experts emphasized the need for flexibility, recognizing
that health, pain, and transportation challenges could affect
attendance. Hybrid formats, including virtual options, community experts
argued, would help accommodate emergencies and inclement weather, making
MBCT programs more accessible to older Black adults with chronic pain
and depression. Community experts also noted how integrating activities
into home environments would foster independence and retention of
skills. Overall, although a majority of our community experts preferred
traditional in-person gatherings, many still valued virtual access for
those unable to travel.

*Sub-theme: Shorter Sessions with Flexible Arrival and Departure Times*

Opinions on session length varied; while some community experts felt two
hours was reasonable, others voiced difficulty managing longer meetings
or frequent attendance over several weeks. Community experts viewed
shorter sessions as a practical concession to accommodate attendees with
health and logistical constraints including older adults with the
chronic pain-depression co-morbidity. In addition to session
abbreviation, community experts also called for buffer periods to
reflect the need for practical and manageable time commitments, with
flexibility for late arrivals, longer conversations, and networking
opportunities. For example, our community experts noted that it often
takes about 30 to 40 minutes for genuine, meaningful conversations to
develop and emphasized the need for enough time to allow participants to
get comfortable, settle in, and become engaged, especially for older
participants or those needing time to get their bearings. After the
session, attendees may desire for the physical or virtual space to
remain open for further networking and community support.

*Theme: Instructor concordance rooted in engagement and respect*\
*Sub-theme: Authentic Engagement and Genuine Respect*\
Trustworthiness was perceived as stemming from genuine engagement and
respectful intent, rather than solely from shared identity. As most of
the participants reiterated, instructors of MBCT would have to "come
correct" in front of the older Black community. Regardless of race,
ethnicity, culture, or community, our community experts agreed that MBCT
instructors could be accepted by the older Black community if they
demonstrated commitment, care, and awareness of local realities.

*Sub-theme: Shared Community and Culture*\
Community experts emphasized that authentic engagement emerges most
naturally when workshops are led by facilitators who belong to the same
community as participants. Shared culture and lived experience create an
immediate sense of trust, belonging, and safety, allowing participants
to feel seen and understood without explanation. Familiar language,
recognition of common challenges, and empathy rooted in shared
experiences reduce feelings of alienation and foster open communication.
In this way, the instructor's presence is not just instructional but
relational. These qualities make participants recognize that the
facilitator "already knows" and can connect on a human level. This
embedded cultural resonance makes community-led programs uniquely
effective, as meaningful connection and comfort are built in from the
start.

*Sub-theme: Shared Race and Ethnicity*\
Community experts expressed a preference for ethnoracial concordance,
feeling that professionals of similar backgrounds were more likely to
better understand their experiences and culture. This led to increased
comfort, trust, and rapport in programs and therapeutic contexts.
Although shared race and ethnicity were viewed as helpful, community
experts argued that they were not the sole determinant of successful
engagement---respect and cultural competence remained paramount.

*Theme: Nuanced Acceptability of Mindfulness and Movement Practices*\
*Sub-theme: Mindfulness Meditation for Pain and Relaxation*\
Large share of the cohort had positive experiences with mindfulness
practices for pain management and relaxation. Activities such as mindful
walking, grounding exercises, and sensory tasks, such as the "raisin
exercise", helped participants cultivate present-moment awareness and
reduced dependence on medications. Class choice, avoidance of imposed
spirituality, and peer support were recommended for meaningful and
sustained engagement.

Sub-theme: Mindfulness Meditation Within Cultural and Spiritual
Frameworks

Mindfulness meditation provoked divergent responses,such as some finding
practices unfamiliar or difficult. Others equated meditation with
prayer, a culturally resonant coping strategy. Adaptation of language,
openness to various faith traditions, and individualized practice were
essential, with calls to decouple such activities from any particular
spiritual or religious requirement.

*Sub-theme: Mindful Movement Improves Well-being*\
Participants valued mindful movement practices that supported relaxation
and physical awareness. Guided walking sessions and small movements
fostered connection to their bodies and provided mental respite, with a
focus on tailoring movement to individual capacity and preference.

*Sub-theme: Accommodate Physical Limitations with Variety*\
Flexibility, inclusivity, and variety were requested for physical
activities. Chair yoga, gentle stretching, water aerobics, dance, and
alternative movement practices were mentioned, acknowledging that "one
size does not fit all." Cultural responsiveness in labeling and
facilitating physical activities was important, enabling comfort and
respect for faith backgrounds and personal boundaries.

*Theme: CBT tailored for more inclusivity and empowerment*\
*Sub-theme: Simplify Medical and Psychological Terminology for
Understanding*

CBT was generally endorsed by our team of community experts. However,
community experts reported that complex terminology was a recurring
barrier. Terms like "cognitive" would require clarification and simple
explanations. Plain language, visual aids, and concise highlighting of
key points would aid understanding, especially for those facing
cognitive or processing challenges. Programs should respect diverse
backgrounds and faith traditions in their communication.

Community experts also underscored a need for language that respects
diverse backgrounds and beliefs. For instance, there was a discussion
about how mindfulness or meditation practices should avoid imposing
specific religious language or faith-based terms on others. Instead,
participants advocated for inclusive language that allows individuals to
engage in ways consistent with their own spiritual or cultural
practices.

Visual aids and the presentation of information in manageable portions
were emphasized as important tools to support comprehension.
Participants mentioned that pictorials and clear graphics would help to
draw attention and make content easier to understand, especially when
paired with concise articulation of central ideas in place of lengthy
passages.

*Sub-theme: Incorporate Group Support and Community Resources*\
Generational experiences with pain and coping shaped preferences for
peer support and resource sharing. Breaking cycles of silence and "tough
love" through vulnerability, communal healing, and educational exchange
was seen as vital. The community was already engaged in sharing
resources and narratives, while expressing a need for comprehensive
resource lists and greater collaboration. Holistic engagement,
integration of alternative medicine and open discussions about faith and
coping enhanced empowerment, self-advocacy, and sense of belonging
within health and support programs.

Alongside sharing practical resources, contributors discussed the need
for holistic engagement. They described the value of structured programs
that blended educational materials, exercise routines, and group
motivation, noting that these methods could be empowering and
energizing. Many community experts highlighted their use of alternative
medicine, traditional remedies, and faith, reinforcing the importance of
open dialogue about diverse ways to manage pain and heal---beyond
medication alone---while nurturing belonging, resilience, and hope
within the community. Community Experts also voiced the importance of
accountability and flexibility---encouraging sharing coping strategies
but resisting rigid expectations---so individuals feel supported, not
pressured.

**Discussion**\
*Overview and Key Findings*\
This study conducted CE Studios with the aim of adapting MBCT for older
Black adults experiencing chronic pain and depression. Using a
community-engaged, participatory approach, qualitative analysis of our
CE Studios yielded four central themes: (1) needs for flexible and
sustainable program delivery; (2) the importance of instructor
concordance rooted in engagement and respect; (3) nuanced acceptability
of mindfulness and movement practices; and (4) cognitive-behavioral
strategies and language tailored for more inclusivity and empowerment.
The research illuminated how an effectively designed, community-rooted
MBCT could address healthcare disparities and improve outcomes for a
population historically marginalized in pain and mental health care.

Findings from our qualitative analysis both corroborate and extend
existing literature on barriers to mindfulness and cognitive-behavioral
interventions among Black Americans with chronic pain and depression.
Although Mindfulness-Based Interventions (MBIs) have been shown to
provide mild-to-moderate improvements in both pain and mood symptoms
(Scott et al., 2022), prior research has documented disproportionately
worse pain outcomes among Black communities (CITATION -- Pham et al 2023
Narrative review). Yet, uptake of MBIs in these communities remains
limited, in part due to perceived cultural incongruence, structural
barriers to access, and enduring medical mistrust rooted in historical
harms (Hurt et al., 2024).

Community expert emphasis on sustainability, compensation, and
community-based venues directly reflected recommendations from the
literature on intervention adaptation: MBIs, when delivered through
trusted community organizations by instructors who are racially and/or
culturally concordant with participants, increase acceptability and
engagement (Scott et al., 2022; Estrella, 2023). Our community experts
confirmed that their willingness to attend and persist in MBCT was
influenced not only by intervention content, but also on authentic
investment in their lives, economic realities, and community well-being.

*Program Flexibility, Sustainability, and Relevance*\
Community experts made clear that superficial or one-off research
efforts exacerbate distrust---long-term partnership and economic
inclusivity are vital for success. This finding supports prior calls for
community-engaged research that recognizes historic inequities and
incorporates input from conception to implementation (Israel et al.,
2010; Wallerstein et al., 2018). Rotating programs across neighborhoods
and combining in-person with virtual sessions address both
transportation and accessibility needs, a recurring barrier in extant
studies (Scott et al., 2022).

Importantly, community experts advocated for a hybrid delivery model
that would fit the complex lives of older adults with pain and mobility
limitations. This would resonate with research on telehealth and hybrid
models, which suggests these adaptations can partially mitigate access
inequities when properly resourced (Knight et al., 2022; Hurt et al.,
2024).

*Instructor Characteristics: Trust, Community, and Representation*\
The theme of instructor trustworthiness---rooted in genuine community
engagement, cultural attunement, or shared background---echoes a core
principle in culturally adaptive interventions: while representation
matters, intent and proximity are equally significant (Scott et al.,
2022). Findings from our qualitative analysis add nuance, suggesting
that while many participants value racial concordance, respect and
understanding of local context can, at times, outweigh shared identitiy-
especially when facilitators demonstrate a genuine investment in
participants lived realities.

Alignment between program instructors and program members in lived
experiences and cultural identity could deepen trust and facilitated
openness, echoing broader calls in the literature to recruit and train
facilitators from within target communities (Estrella, 2023). However,
our qualitative analysis further illuminates complexities surrounding
ethnic concordance, such as concerns about appearing exclusionary or
experiencing misinterpretation from outsiders---dynamics underexplored
in previous research.

*Mindfulness and Movement: Cultural and Spiritual Adaptation*\
Our findings from our qualitative analysis regarding mindfulness
acceptance and adaptation expand on prior research by documenting both
enthusiasm for and ambivalence about these practices among older Black
adults. For some, mindfulness provided transformative tools for pain and
mood management; for others, meditation's perceived cultural or
spiritual disconnect was a barrier. The call for faith- and
spirituality-sensitive language and practices, or the use of familiar
analogues (e.g., prayer, knitting, walking), underscores the necessity
of cultural humility and adaptation (Estrella, 2023; Kabat-Zinn, 1990).

Diverse reactions from the community experts to terminology like "yoga"
or "meditation" reinforce the need to avoid prescriptive,
one-size-fits-all program approaches. As in prior reviews, integration
of movement-based mindfulness (such as chair yoga, line dancing, or
walking) and transparency about spiritual ideology are key to fostering
engagement (Scott et al., 2022). Moreover, honoring musical, rhythmic,
and intergenerational traditions can root mindfulness in cultural
familiarity, increasing engagement and sustainability.

*Simplifying CBT and Supporting Peer Empowerment*\
Consistent with literature on health literacy and empowerment, community
experts highlighted the alienating effect of complex, jargon-laden
medical or psychological terminology. They echoed widespread evidence
that accesible language, visual aids, and support for understanding
personal health enhance both acceptability and outcomes, especially
among older adults (Levitt et al., 2018; Hurt et al., 2024). MBCT must
therefore be demystified---describing "cognitive" components in
relatable, actionable ways, and making explicit links to daily pain and
coping.

Furthermore, community expert appreciation for peer support and the
sharing of community resources reflected broader movements toward
task-sharing and lay-facilitated interventions (cite Pham narrative
review). These approaches build community capacity, embed interventions
within lived realities, and foster resilience through interdependence
and storytelling---factors especially powerful for marginalized
populations (Oetzel et al., 2018).

\[ Insert Table 2. *Implications for Practice and Policy* \]

*Strengths and Limitations*\
The present qualitative study's strengths include its participatory CBPR
design, grounding in a trusted community organization, and intentional
focus on representation throughout recruitment and facilitation. The
robust thematic analysis, informed by lived community experience and
interdisciplinary researchers, increased transferability. However, as
with all qualitative research, findings may be influenced by specific
local context, overrepresentation of women, and possible social
desirability in focus group dialogue. Generalizability to older Black
adults outside Boston or with different religious affiliations,
educational backgrounds, or levels of digital literacy is limited.

Additionally, participants were selected with mild-moderate depression
and existing interest in group health interventions, introducing
potential selection bias. The implications may not fully extend to those
with more severe mental health concerns or low baseline interest in
group-based therapies.

*Future Directions*\
Future research should explore adaptation and implementation of MBCT in
more geographically and demographically diverse Black elder communities,
including those with significant rural, male, or non-Christian
representation. Comparative effectiveness trials of lay- versus
professionally-led MBCT, investigation of optimal delivery formats
(e.g., self-paced digital, intergenerational, faith-based), and
examination of mechanisms---such as social support, empowerment, or
improved health literacy---will advance the field. Researchers should
also test the impact of explicit anti-racist and trauma-informed
approaches on program uptake and clinical outcomes.

Longitudinal evaluation is needed to determine whether flexible,
community-driven MBCT can reduce healthcare disparities in chronic pain
and depression among Black elders.

*Conclusion*\
Adapting MBCT for Black elders with chronic pain and depression
necessitates more than a translation of existing protocols; it requires
deep partnership, sustained commitment, and culturally grounded
co-creation. This study demonstrates that, when rooted in trust,
flexibility, and community wisdom, mindfulness and cognitive therapies
can be relevant and transformative for those historically excluded from
mental health research and practice. These findings offer a blueprint
for future interventions aimed at dismantling inequities and advancing
social justice in behavioral healthcare.

**References**\
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology.
*Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3*(2), 77--101.

Estrella, S. (2023). The Role of Religion and Spirituality in Adapting
Mindfulness-Based Interventions for Black Americans: A Scoping Review.
*Mindfulness, 14*, 351--369.

Hurt, T. R., Versey, H. S., & Sheats, K. J. (2024). Facilitators,
Barriers, and Outcomes of Mindfulness-Based Interventions Among Black
and African American Adults: A Systematic Review. *Pain Management
Today, 13*(4), 473--485.

Israel, B. A., Eng, E., Schulz, A. J., & Parker, E. A. (Eds.). (2010).
*Methods for community-based participatory research for health* (2nd
ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). *Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of
Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and Illness*. Delta.

Levitt, H. M., Bamberg, M., Creswell, J. W., Frost, D. M., Josselson,
R., & SuÃ¡rez-Orozco, C. (2018). Journal article reporting standards for
qualitative primary, qualitative meta-analytic, and mixed methods
research in psychology: The APA Publications and Communications Board
task force report. *American Psychologist, 73*(1), 26--46.

Oetzel, J. G., Villegas, M., Zenone, H., White Hat, E. R., Wallerstein,
N., & Duran, B. (2018). Enhancing stewardship of community-engaged
research through CBPR principles and trust-building. *Progress in
Community Health Partnerships, 12*(2), 207--220.

Scott, M. S., et al.Â (2022). Culturally Adapting Mind-Body Interventions
for Black Individuals with Chronic Pain: Recommendations for Reducing
Disparities and Improving Outcomes. *Pain Medicine, 23*(7), 11168092.

Wallerstein, N., Duran, B., Oetzel, J., & Minkler, M. (2018).
*Community-Based Participatory Research for Health: Advancing Social and
Health Equity* (3rd ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology.
*Qualitative Research in Psychology*, 3(2), 77-101.

Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D. (2010). The
efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses.
*Cognitive Therapy and Research*, 36(5), 427-440.

Israel, B. A., Eng, E., Schulz, A. J., & Parker, E. A. (Eds.). (2010).
*Methods for community-based participatory research for health* (2nd
ed.). Jossey-Bass.

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). *Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of
Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and Illness*. Delta.

Levitt, H. M., et al.Â (2018). Journal article reporting standards for
qualitative primary, qualitative meta-analytic, and mixed methods
research in psychology: The APA Publications and Communications Board
task force report. *American Psychologist*, 73(1), 26--46.

Meadows, R., et al.Â (2015). Community engagement studios: A new model
for translational research. *Journal of Clinical and Translational
Science*, 1(1), 57--65.

Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2013).
*Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression*. The Guilford
Press.

De la Rosa, S., Brady, B. R., Ibrahim, M. M., Herder, K. E., Wallace, J.
S., Padilla, A. R., & Vanderah, T. W. (2024). Co-occurrence of chronic
pain and anxiety/depression symptoms in US adults: prevalence,
functional impacts, and opportunities.Â *Pain*,Â *165*(3), 666-673.

de Heer EW, Gerrits MMJG, Beekman ATF, Dekker J, van Marwijk HWJ, de
Waal MWM, Spinhoven P, Penninx BWJH, van der Feltz-Cornelis CM. The
association of depression and anxiety with pain: a study from NESDA.
PLoS One 2014;9:e106907.

Dahlhamer J, Lucas J, Zelaya, C, et al. Prevalence of Chronic Pain and
High-Impact Chronic Pain Among Adults --- United States, 2016. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:1001--1006.
DOI:Â <http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6736a2>

Williams JM, Russell I, Russell D. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy:
further issues in current evidence and future research. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2008;76:524--529. doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.76.3.524.

Kabat-Zinn J. Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in
Everyday Life. New York: Hyperion; 1994.

Kuyken W, Byford S, Taylor RS, et al. Mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy to prevent relapse in recurrent depression. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2008;76:966--978. doi: 10.1037/a0013786.

MacKenzie, M. B., & Kocovski, N. L. (2016). Mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy for depression: trends and developments.Â *Psychology research
and behavior management*,Â *9*, 125--132.
<https://doi.org/10.2147/PRBM.S63949>

Pei, J. H., Ma, T., Nan, R. L., Chen, H. X., Zhang, Y. B., Gou, L., &
Dou, X. M. (2020). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Treating
Chronic Pain: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.Â *Psychology, Health
& Medicine*,Â *26*(3), 333--346.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13548506.2020.1849746>

Kantamneni, A., Winkler, R. L., & Calvert, K. (2019). \"Chapter 7:
Incorporating community: opportunities and challenges in community
engaged research\". InÂ *A Research Agenda for Environmental Management*.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. Retrieved Aug 18, 2025,
fromÂ <https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788115193.00016>

Wallerstein NB, Duran B. Using community-based participatory research to
address health disparities. Health Promot Pract. 2006 Jul;7(3):312-23.
doi: 10.1177/1524839906289376. Epub 2006 Jun 7. PMID: 16760238.

Cunningham-Erves J, Mayo-Gamble T, Vaughn Y, Hawk J, Helms M, Barajas C,
Joosten Y. Engagement of community stakeholders to develop a framework
to guide research dissemination to communities. Health Expect. 2020
Aug;23(4):958-968. doi: 10.1111/hex.13076. Epub 2020 May 25. PMID:
32452067; PMCID: PMC7495063.

Anderson KO, Green CR, Payne R. Racial and ethnic disparities in pain:
causes and consequences of unequal care. J Pain. 2009
Dec;10(12):1187-204. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2009.10.002. PMID: 19944378.

Mossey JM. Defining racial and ethnic disparities in pain management.
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2011 Jul;469(7):1859-70. doi:
10.1007/s11999-011-1770-9. PMID: 21249483; PMCID: PMC3111792.

Baker TA, Buchanan NT, Corson N. Factors influencing chronic pain
intensity in older black women: examining depression, locus of control,
and physical health. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2008 Jun;17(5):869-78.
doi: 10.1089/jwh.2007.0452. PMID: 18537488; PMCID: PMC2942750.

Bazargan M, Yazdanshenas H, Gordon D, Orum G. Pain in Community-Dwelling
Elderly African Americans. J Aging Health. 2016 Apr;28(3):403-25. doi:
10.1177/0898264315592600. Epub 2015 Jun 26. PMID: 26115668; PMCID:
PMC4804700.

Ferrell BA, Ferrell BR. Principles of pain management in older people.
Comprehensive Therapy. 1991 Aug;17(8):53-58. PMID: 1742979.

Pham, T. V., Doorley, J., Kenney, M., Joo, J. H., Shallcross, A. J.,
Kincade, M., ... Vranceanu, A. M. (2023). Addressing Chronic Pain
Disparities Between Black and White People: A Narrative Review of
Socio-Ecological Determinants. *Pain Management*, *13*(8), 473--496.
<https://doi.org/10.2217/pmt-2023-0032>

Vlaeyen, Johan W.S.âˆ—,a,b; Kole-Snijders, Ank M.J.a,c; Boeren, Ruben
G.B.a; van Eek, H.c. Fear of movement/(re)injury in chronic low back
pain and its relation to behavioral performance. Pain 62(3):p 363-372,
September 1995. \| DOI: 10.1016/0304-3959(94)00279-N

Crombez, Geerta,\*; Vlaeyen, Johan W.Sb,c; Heuts, Peter H.T.Gb; Lysens,
Rolandd. Pain-related fear is more disabling than pain itself: evidence
on the role of pain-related fear in chronic back pain disability. Pain
80(1):p 329-339, March 1, 1999. \| DOI: 10.1016/S0304-3959(98)00229-2

McCracken LM, Matthews AK, Tang TS, Cuba SL. A comparison of blacks and
whites seeking treatment for chronic pain. Clin J Pain. 2001
Sep;17(3):249-55. doi: 10.1097/00002508-200109000-00011. PMID: 11587117.

Administration for community living report:
<https://acl.gov/sites/default/files/Profile%20of%20OA/AAProfileReport2021.pdf?utm_source=chatgpt.com>

Pickett YR, Bazelais KN, Bruce ML. Late-life depression in older African
Americans: a comprehensive review of epidemiological and clinical data.
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Sep;28(9):903-13. doi: 10.1002/gps.3908.
Epub 2012 Dec 7. PMID: 23225736; PMCID: PMC3674152. Roxbury:\
<https://www.roxburyhistoricalsociety.org/about-roxbury>\
<http://www.bostonplans.org/documents/research-other/neighborhood-profile-2019/neighborhood-profile-2019-roxbury>
<https://www.cityofboston.gov/Images_Documents/Roxbury_Planning_District_Profile_tcm3-12996.pdf>

Dorchester:\
<http://www.bostonplans.org/documents/research-other/neighborhood-profile-2017/neighborhood-profile-dorchester>\
<https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/document-file-07-2016/dorchester_planning_district_profile.pdf>\
<https://www.boston.gov/neighborhood/dorchester>

Scholz J, Finnerup NB, Attal N, Aziz Q, Baron R, Bennett MI, Benoliel R,
Cohen M, Cruccu G, Davis KD, Evers S, First M, Giamberardino MA, Hansson
P, Kaasa S, Korwisi B, Kosek E, Lavand\'homme P, Nicholas M, Nurmikko T,
Perrot S, Raja SN, Rice ASC, Rowbotham MC, Schug S, Simpson DM, Smith
BH, Svensson P, Vlaeyen JWS, Wang SJ, Barke A, Rief W, Treede RD;
Classification Committee of the Neuropathic Pain Special Interest Group
(NeuPSIG). The IASP classification of chronic pain for ICD-11: chronic
neuropathic pain. Pain. 2019 Jan;160(1):53-59. doi:
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001365. PMID: 30586071; PMCID: PMC6310153.

Ellerbroek H, Hanssen I, Lathouwers K, Cillessen L, Dekkers S, Veldman
SE, van den Heuvel SAS, Speckens AEM, Schellekens AFA. Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for chronic noncancer pain and prescription opioid use
disorder: A qualitative pilot study of its feasibility and the perceived
process of change. Brain Behav. 2023 Jul;13(7):e3005. doi:
10.1002/brb3.3005. Epub 2023 May 24. PMID: 37226589; PMCID: PMC10338789.

Ellerbroek H, Hanssen I, Lathouwers K, Cillessen L, Dekkers S, Veldman
SE, van den Heuvel SAS, Speckens AEM, Schellekens AFA. Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for chronic noncancer pain and prescription opioid use
disorder: A qualitative pilot study of its feasibility and the perceived
process of change. Brain Behav. 2023 Jul;13(7):e3005. doi:
10.1002/brb3.3005. Epub 2023 May 24. PMID: 37226589; PMCID: PMC10338789.

Pinto, B. M., Tavares, I., & Pozza, D. H. (2024). Enhancing Chronic
Non-Cancer Pain Management: A Systematic Review of Mindfulness Therapies
and Guided Imagery Interventions. *Medicina*, *60*(5), 686.
https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina60050686

Garland EL, Gaylord SA, Palsson O, Faurot K, Douglas Mann J, Whitehead
WE. Therapeutic mechanisms of a mindfulness-based treatment for IBS:
effects on visceral sensitivity, catastrophizing, and affective
processing of pain sensations. J Behav Med. 2012 Dec;35(6):591-602. doi:
10.1007/s10865-011-9391-z. Epub 2011 Dec 8. PMID: 22161025; PMCID:
PMC3883954.

**Table 1**. *Representative Quotes from the Community Engagement
Studios*

+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| **Theme:         |                                                   |
| Flexible and     |                                                   |
| sustainable      |                                                   |
| program          |                                                   |
| delivery**       |                                                   |
+==================+===================================================+
| Persistent and   | "A lot of people that are dealing with pain every |
| Self-Sustainable | day also are disabled. So, they don't have that   |
| Delivery         | income."                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| In-Person        | "I just like to do it the old-fashioned way. I    |
| Options at       | like to see and meet people, you know?"           |
| Thoughtful       |                                                   |
| Locations        | "I was impressed when you \[the researcher\] were |
|                  | saying you was looking for a local library to     |
|                  | hold these discussions. This library is right     |
|                  | down my alley."                                   |
|                  |                                                   |
|                  | "I'm not that computer savvy yet. Right now I     |
|                  | have a hard time filling out stuff on computer,   |
|                  | even signing my name. So virtual seems a little   |
|                  | hard."                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Virtual Options  | "Have to consider Zoom as well because in the     |
| for              | winter weather you're not going to get people     |
| Accessibility    | with pain coming out, that's just not going to    |
| and Convenience  | happen. they gonna want to start canceling        |
|                  | sessions and those are things to just consider"   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Shorter Sessions | XXX                                               |
| with Flexible    |                                                   |
| Arrival and      |                                                   |
| Departure Times  |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| **Theme:         |                                                   |
| Instructor       |                                                   |
| concordance      |                                                   |
| rooted in        |                                                   |
| engagement and   |                                                   |
| respect**        |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Authentic        | XXX                                               |
| Engagement and   |                                                   |
| Genuine Respect  |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Shared Community | "In a different community ... you might feel like |
| and Culture      | 'how do I fit in here?' But in this community,    |
|                  | I'm around my own people. So I fit, even if my    |
|                  | skin might not look the same someone else's."     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Shared Race and  | "I'd rather deal with someone in my same race     |
| Ethnicity        | because the majority of the time, they grew up    |
|                  | where I grew up."                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| **Theme: Nuanced |                                                   |
| Acceptability of |                                                   |
| Mindfulness and  |                                                   |
| Movement         |                                                   |
| Practices**      |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Mindfulness      | XXX                                               |
| Meditation for   |                                                   |
| Pain and         |                                                   |
| Relaxation       |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Mindfulness      | "Black Americans, I don't think we meditate       |
| Meditation       | ...cause, our life is totally different from      |
| Within Cultural  | other races. And you really don't have no time to |
| and Spiritual    | be meditating."\                                  |
| Frameworks       | \                                                 |
|                  | "Way back then, what my great grandfather used to |
|                  | tell us, alls they had was prayer."\              |
|                  | \                                                 |
|                  | "When we meditate, we don't push faith but we     |
|                  | pray and so it's the difference in language that  |
|                  | makes it"\                                        |
|                  | \                                                 |
|                  | "Meditation could work better over like knitting, |
|                  | quilting, little activities like that."           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Mindful Movement | XXX                                               |
| Improves         |                                                   |
| Well-being       |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Accommodate      | "I don't have an issue with stretching and all    |
| Physical         | those things, but me being a Christian, I would   |
| Limitations with | have an issue with when you say yoga."            |
| Variety          |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| **Theme: CBT     |                                                   |
| tailored for     |                                                   |
| more inclusivity |                                                   |
| and              |                                                   |
| empowerment**    |                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Simplify Medical | "We should talk more about what we can do to help |
| and              | at our pain"\                                     |
| Psychological    | "As far as cognitive, you need to expand that     |
| Terminology for  | more so everyone will understand what it is that  |
| Understanding    | you're referring to."\                            |
|                  | \                                                 |
|                  | "These are warning signs that I never knew about  |
|                  | because they were never explained well. "         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Incorporate      | "We don't have insurance, we don't have money,    |
| Group Support    | you know. So, our grandparents, great-great       |
| and Community    | grandparents turned to different remedies that    |
| Resources        | worked. Just some basic cooking things that you'd |
|                  | put together. Here, drink this, your cold will go |
|                  | away, you know."\                                 |
|                  | \                                                 |
|                  | "A lot of people don't know that there's a        |
|                  | patient bill of rights."\                         |
|                  | \                                                 |
|                  | "Educating people that there are other options -- |
|                  | getting your back wrapped, and all that other     |
|                  | stuff, you know what I mean"                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

**Table 2**: Implications for Practice and Policy

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **\#**   **Recommendation**
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  1        Invest in long-term, compensated partnerships and community
           co-leadership.

  2        Design hybrid, flexible delivery that accommodates pain, mobility,
           and weather constraints while ensuring access for the digitally
           excluded.

  3        Prioritize the recruitment and training of instructors with shared
           community or cultural backgrounds, but ensure all facilitators
           receive deep training in cultural humility and local realities.

  4        Explicitly integrate spiritual flexibility, allowing for
           personalized or collective faith- and gratitude-based practices.

  5        Use plain language, visuals, and participatory diagnostics to
           demystify psychological concepts, empower self-advocacy, and
           strengthen patient-provider collaboration.

  6        Support resource-list building, peer networks, and the
           normalization of alternative and heritage healing practices.

  7        Wider implementation of MBCT for older Black adults should be
           accompanied by rigorous evaluation, sustainability, and
           partnerships with Black-led organizations and faith communities.

  8        Attention to historical trauma, anti-racism, and structural
           barriers should remain foregrounded throughout adaptation and
           delivery.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
